Bachelor’s thesis UAS
Business Information Technology
2025

Juuso Laakso

The Next Generation of ServerSide JavaScript Runtimes
– Node.js, Deno and Bun: Evolution and Future of
JavaScript Runtimes

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

Bachelor’s thesis | Abstract
Turku University of Applied Sciences
Business Information Technology
2025 | Total pages 43

Juuso Laakso

The Next Generation of Server-Side JavaScript
Runtimes
­ Evolution and Future of JavaScript Runtimes

This thesis investigates the evolution and future direction of JavaScript runtimes,
focusing on Node.js, Deno, and Bun. The motivation for this thesis stems from the
growing industry's need to understand how new runtimes are challenging Node.js. This
thesis examined differences in these runtimes to offer guidance to developers,
educators, and businesses on adoption and long­term significance.
The study combined a literature review with practical benchmark tests, examining the
history, design, and ecosystems of each runtime, and comparing their performance.
The analysis also covered module systems, built­in tools, and TypeScript support,
noting that performance should be evaluated alongside security, compatibility, and
ecosystem maturity.
Results indicated that Node.js remains the most established and widely adopted
runtime, with proven reliability and a mature ecosystem. Deno provided a more
secure, modern development experience, while Bun demonstrated the best overall
performance and strong compatibility with existing Node.js applications. This thesis
concludes that there is no single best choice among these runtimes, as each can fit
different priorities and use cases.
Keywords:
JavaScript, Node.js, Deno, Bun, Server­Side JavaScript, web development, programming

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

Opinnäytetyö AMK | Tiivistelmä
Turun ammattikorkeakoulu
Tietojenkäsittely
2025 | 43 sivua

Juuso Laakso

Seuraavan sukupolven JavaScript-ajoympäristöt
­ JavaScript­ajoympäristöjen kehitys ja tulevaisuus

Tämän opinnäytetyön tarkoituksena oli tutkia JavaScript­ajoympäristöjen kehitystä ja
tulevaisuuden suuntaa keskittyen Node.js­, Deno­ ja Bun­ympäristöihin. Opinnäytetyön
motivaationa oli alan kasvava tarve ymmärtää, miten uudet ajoympäristöt haastavat
Node.js:n pitkään jatkuneen aseman verkkokehityksen vakiintuneena ratkaisuna.
Opinnäytetyössä analysoidaan näiden ajoympäristöjen eroja ja pohditaan
käytännönläheisiä näkökulmia niiden soveltuvuudesta eri sidosryhmille, kuten
kehittäjille, kouluttajille ja yrityksille.
Tutkimus toteutettiin kirjallisuuskatsauksen ja käytännön suorituskykytestien
yhdistelmänä, jossa tarkastellaan kunkin ajoympäristön taustaa, keskeisiä
suunnitteluperiaatteita ja ekosysteemin kehitystä, kun taas paikallisesti suoritetuissa
testeissä verrattiin suorituskykyä. Lisäksi vertailtiin moduulijärjestelmiä,
sisäänrakennettuja työkaluja ja TypeScript­tukea.
Tulokset osoittivat, että Node.js on edelleen vakiintunein ja laajimmin tuettu
ajoympäristö. Deno määrittää turvallisemman ja modernimman kehitysympäristön,
kun taas Bun osoittautui suorituskykyisimmäksi ja erittäin yhteensopivaksi olemassa
olevan Node.js­koodin kanssa. Opinnäytetyön johtopäätöksenä todettiin, että
ajoympäristöjen joukosta ei voi valita yhtä parasta vaihtoehtoa, sillä sopivin
ajoympäristö riippuu eri vaatimuksista ja käyttötarkoituksesta.
Asiasanat:
JavaScript, Node.js, Deno, Bun, palvelinpuolen JavaScript, verkkokehitys,
ohjelmistokehitys

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

Contents
Usage of AI in the thesis

6

List of abbreviations

7

1 Introduction

8

1.1 Problem Statement and Motivation

9

1.2 Research Objectives and Scope

9

2 Background and Evolution of JavaScript Runtimes

10

2.1 Rise of JavaScript on the Server

10

2.2 Limitations and Motivations for Change

11

2.3 Deno Runtime

13

2.4 Bun Runtime

15

2.5 Current Landscape and Developer Adoption

17

3 Comparison of Runtime Features

18

3.1 Module Systems and Dependency Management

18

3.2 Built-in Tooling and Standard Library

19

3.3 TypeScript Support

20

3.4 Compatability and Migration View

21

4 Performance Comparison and Analysis

23

4.1 Benchmarking Approach and Test Environment

23

4.2 Benchmarks

23

4.3 Performance Analysis and Interpretation

28

4.4 Security and Performance Implications

29

4.5 Developer Experience Considerations

30

5 Education and Business Considerations

31

5.1 Runtime Adoption for Education

31

5.2 Business Adoption and Migration

31

6 Conclusion and Future Work

33

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

6.1 Future Work

34

References

35

Figures
Figure 1. Usage statistics from State of JavaScript 2024 survey.

8

Figure 2. How well each runtime performed in a constant stream of HTTP
requests.

24

Figure 3. Showing Deno’s improved performance when running Deno-specific
code.

25

Figure 4. Runtime read and write performance.

26

Figure 5. Displaying JSON Stringify and Parse performance between each
runtime.

27

Figure 6. CPU-bound operations, performance displayed in milliseconds.

28

Tables
Table 1. Overview of runtime features.

21

Table 2. Simple HTTP server code that was used for Figure 2 benchmark.

24

Table 3. Deno specific code that was used to host a basic HTTP server.

25

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

Usage of AI in the thesis
This thesis work utilized Grammarly and Claude Opus 4 for language refinement,
spelling correction, and structural suggestions. All text has been carefully reviewed
before inclusion.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

List of abbreviations
API

Application Programming Interface

ES

ECMAScript

HTTP

Hypertext Transfer Protocol

HTTPS

Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure

I/O

Input / Output

JIT

Just-in-Time

JS

JavaScript

JSR

JavaScript Registry

NPM

Node Package Manager

PNPM

Performant Node Package Manager

TTFB

Time To First Byte

URL

Uniform Resource Locator

V8

Google’s open-source JavaScript engine

YARN

Yet Another Resource Negotiatorß

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

8

1 Introduction
The landscape of server­side JavaScript development has undergone a remarkable
transformation since Ryan Dahl introduced Node.js in 2009, changing how developers
approach backend programming (Dahl et al., 2020). Node.js leveraged Google's V8
JavaScript engine to bring JavaScript beyond the browser, enabling developers to build
scalable server applications using a single programming language across their entire
technology stack. This innovation quickly revolutionized web development, with
Node.js now powering hundreds of thousands of websites and becoming integral to
many companies’ technology infrastructure (W3Techs, 2025).
According to the State of JavaScript 2024 multiple­choice questionnaire survey with
11 576 respondents, Node.js maintains its position as the dominant JavaScript runtime,
as represented in Figure 1, with the majority of developers expressing satisfaction with
its capabilities and ecosystem (Greif & Burel, 2024). This widespread adoption has been
driven by Node.js's robust ecosystem, extensive NPM package repository, and proven
ability to handle concurrent connections efficiently through its event­driven, non­
blocking I/O model.

Figure 1. Usage statistics from State of JavaScript 2024 survey.

However, as web applications have grown increasingly complex and performance
requirements have intensified, certain limitations of Node.js have become more
apparent. Ryan Dahl himself mentions several design choices he now conceives as
problematic, including security concerns, module system complexities, and

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

9

performance bottlenecks (Dahl, 2018). These acknowledgments have prompted the
development community to explore alternatives that could address these shortcomings
while building upon Node.js's strengths.
1.1

Problem Statement and Motivation

In response to Node.js's limitations, two alternatives have emerged: Deno and Bun.
Deno, launched in 2020 by Ryan Dahl, was explicitly designed to address security and
module management issues while providing first­class TypeScript support (Dahl et al.,
2020). The recent release of Deno 2 has further enhanced its compatibility with the
existing Node.js ecosystem (Dahl et al., 2024). Bun, introduced as a performance­
focused alternative, promises speed improvements, with recent academic research
demonstrating that Bun outperforms Node.js across multiple metrics, including
memory usage, execution time, and request handling­capacity (Ahmod, 2023).
Despite these promising developments, comprehensive security research has revealed
new challenges in alternative runtimes that should be carefully judged and examined
(Alhamdan & Staicu, 2025). The choice of JavaScript runtime has implications that
extend beyond technical considerations, affecting application performance, security,
and long­term maintainability for businesses. Educational institutions face decisions
about which technologies to include in their curricula, balancing current industry
standards with emerging technologies.
1.2

Research Objectives and Scope

The objective of this thesis is to examine the current state and future direction of
server­side JavaScript runtimes, focusing on Node.js, Deno, and Bun. The study aims to
identify the key technical, performance, and ecosystem differences between these
platforms and to evaluate their suitability for modern web development.
The scope of the research includes both theoretical and practical analysis. The
theoretical part explores the background, evolution, and architectural design of each
runtime, while the practical part focuses on performance benchmarking. Other factors
such as module systems, TypeScript support, and developer experience are also
compared to provide a better understanding of each runtime.
The aim is to give a perspective of where JavaScript runtimes stand today and how they
may develop further.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

10

2 Background and Evolution of JavaScript Runtimes
The introduction of Node.js in 2009 revolutionized web development by enabling
JavaScript execution outside the browser, quickly establishing itself as the industry
standard for server­side JavaScript applications (Ahmod, 2023). However, as Node.js
matured, its creator Ryan Dahl had concerns over several design and security issues
that motivated the development of new approaches to JavaScript runtime design
(Dahl, 2018).
The current landscape shows Node.js maintaining a dominant position in the server­
side JavaScript market, with widespread adoption across various industries and
development teams (Usage statistics of Node.js, 2025; Greif & Burel, 2024). According
to the State of JavaScript 2024 survey, Node.js remains the most widely used JavaScript
runtime, though emerging alternatives like Deno and Bun are gaining traction among
developers seeking modern solutions (Greif & Burel, 2024).
The emergence of these alternatives has also coincided with broader changes in web
development practices, including the adoption of serverless architecture and edge
computing paradigms that place different demands on runtime performance and
capabilities (Vepsäläinen et al., 2025). This evolving landscape requires careful
evaluation of how runtimes address both current needs and future requirements in
web development.
This chapter examines the evolution of JavaScript runtimes, beginning with Node.js’s
rise and the specific limitations that motivated the development of alternatives. This
will provide foundational context for understanding the technical, security, and
business implications explored in subsequent chapters.
2.1

Rise of JavaScript on the Server

Node.js emerged in 2009 as a revolutionary solution that transformed server­side
JavaScript development. Created by Ryan Dahl, Node.js enabled JavaScript execution
outside the browser environment by leveraging Google’s V8 JavaScript engine and
introducing an event­driven, non­blocking I/O model (Ahmod, 2023). This innovation
represented a paradigm shift that allowed developers to use JavaScript across their
entire application stack, addressing limitations in existing server­side technologies that
struggled with high­concurrency scenarios.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

11

The technical foundation of Node.js is built upon the robust V8 JavaScript engine,
which employs Just­In­Time (JIT) compilation to optimize performance through
sophisticated multi­tier compilation approaches (Ahmod, 2023). The event­driven
architecture utilizes a callback queue and event loop mechanism that creates
asynchronous execution capabilities despite JavaScript’s single­threaded nature. When
applications encounter I/O operations, the event loop can continue processing other
tasks rather than blocking the entire application, making Node.js particularly well­
suited for applications requiring high concurrency (Ahmod, 2023).
Node.js has achieved remarkable adoption since its introduction, establishing itself as a
dominant force in server­side JavaScript development. Current usage statistics
demonstrate that Node.js maintains a considerable presence across various industries
and application types, proving its reliability in production environments (Usage
statistics of Node.js, 2025; Greif & Burel, 2024).
A critical factor in Node.js’s success has been the development of NPM (Node Package
Manager), which became the largest repository of reusable software components. This
extensive ecosystem has enabled developers to leverage thousands of pre­built
modules, accelerating development time (Ahmod, 2023). The NPM ecosystem has
become integral to the modern JavaScript development workflow, providing solutions
for virtually every common programming challenge.
Node.js’s success established the foundation for the broader JavaScript runtime
ecosystem that exists today. Its proven capabilities in production environments,
combined with the identification of specific limitations and areas for improvement,
created the context in which newer runtimes like Deno and Bun emerged (Gautam,
2021). However, as applications face growing demands for performance and security,
some limitations of Node.js have become more apparent, particularly in these areas
(Ahmod, 2023; Dahl, 2018).
2.2

Limitations and Motivations for Change

Despite Node.js's remarkable success and widespread adoption, several limitations
became apparent as the platform matured, and web development requirements
evolved. The biggest critique came straight from Ryan Dahl, the original creator of
Node.js himself. In his 2018 JSConf EU presentation titled "10 Things I Regret About
Node.js," Dahl provided a retrospective analysis that points out critical design decisions
that had proven problematic over time (Dahl, 2018).

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

12

One of the key concerns Dahl raised was Node.js's overly permissive security model.
Unlike browser environments where JavaScript operates within a restricted sandbox,
Node.js applications have unrestricted access to the file system, network, and system
resources by default (Dahl, 2018). This design choice, while enabling powerful server­
side capabilities, introduces substantial security risks, particularly when applications
incorporate third­party modules from the NPM ecosystem.
The security entailment of this permissive model has been demonstrated through real­
world incidents. Recent security breaches, such as the compromise of popular NPM
packages with cryptocurrency mining malware, highlight the ongoing vulnerability of
the Node.js ecosystem to supply chain attacks (Lakshmanan, 2024). These incidents
show an increasing need for a more granular permission system that can limit potential
damage from compromised or malicious packages.
Dahl also expressed regret about several design decisions related to the Node.js
module system. The choice to use CommonJS instead of ES modules, the
implementation of centralized package management through NPM, and the complex
dependency resolution algorithm all contributed to what he described as unnecessary
complexity (Dahl, 2018). The reliance on package.json files and the node_modules
directory structure, while functional, created a system that could become unwieldy for
large projects with complex dependency trees.
Additionally, responsiveness and latency have been noted as areas where improvement
could greatly benefit applications, particularly in serverless and edge computing
environments where rapid initialization is crucial (Vepsäläinen et al., 2025).
Comparative performance studies demonstrate that Node.js, while adequate for many
use cases, may not satisfy the performance requirements of the more demanding
applications (Ahmod, 2023). These performance constraints have become more
apparent as web applications have grown in complexity and as developers have sought
to optimize for metrics such as “Time to First Byte” (TTFB) and overall application
responsiveness.
These limitations provided clear motivations for the development of alternative
JavaScript runtimes. The security concerns led to an interest in permission­based
systems that could provide fine­grained access control. Performance limitations
motivated the exploration of new approaches that could improve overall execution
speed and performance. The complexity of the module system and build tooling
inspired efforts to create more streamlined, integrated development experiences.
Academic research has shown that alternative approaches to runtime design could
address developers’ concerns (Gautam, 2021). The emergence of Deno and Bun can be

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

13

understood as direct responses to these described challenges, each taking steps to
solve the problems that had become apparent in Node.js's design.
2.3

Deno Runtime

Deno emerged in 2020 as a direct response to the downfalls identified in Node.js,
representing a rethinking of JavaScript runtime design with security and
standardization as primary concerns. Created by Ryan Dahl and his team, Deno was
explicitly designed to address security vulnerabilities, module system complexities, and
architectural decisions that had proven problematic in Node.js (Dahl et al., 2020).
Rather than attempting to evolve Node.js incrementally, Deno represented a clean
slate approach that prioritized secure defaults and modern JavaScript standards.
The architectural difference between Deno and Node.js lies in the choice of
implementation language. While Node.js was built using C++ and C, Deno was
implemented in Rust, a systems programming language that emphasizes memory
safety and performance. Deno's architecture combines the V8 JavaScript engine with
Rust­based runtime services and utilizes the Tokio asynchronous runtime library for
handling concurrent operations (Dahl et al., 2020).
The most distinctive feature of Deno is its permission­based security model, which
differs from Node.js's permissive approach. By default, Deno applications run in a
secure sandbox with no access to file systems, networks, or environment variables
unless explicitly granted through command­line flags (Dahl et al., 2020). This security­
first design addresses one of the primary concerns raised about Node.js, where
applications and their dependencies have unrestricted access to system resources.
The permission system allows developers to grant specific capabilities such as –allowread, --allow-write, --allow-net, and –allow-env on a granular basis, enabling fine­
grained control over what resources an application can access (Xuân, 2025). This
approach reduces the potential attack surface and limits the damage that
compromised packages or malicious code can inflict, addressing the supply chain
security concerns that have plagued the Node.js ecosystem.
Deno was designed with first­class support for modern JavaScript standards, including
native ES modules, TypeScript, and web APIs. Unlike Node.js, which requires additional
tooling for TypeScript compilation, Deno includes a built­in TypeScript compiler and can
execute TypeScript files directly without additional configuration (Dahl et al., 2020).
This integration eliminates many of the build process complexities that developers face
in Node.js environments.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

14

The runtime also provides built­in support for modern web standards, making it easier
for developers to write code that works consistently across many environments (Xuân,
2025). This standard’s compliance reduces the need for polyfills and compatibility
layers that could be required in older Node.js applications in order to support new
modern features in older environments.
Deno abandons the NPM ecosystem in favor of URL­based imports, allowing modules
to be imported directly from any HTTP or HTTPS URL. This approach eliminates the
need for package.json files, node_modules directories, and centralized package
registries (Dahl et al., 2020). While this design provides greater flexibility and reduces
some of the complexity associated with NPM's dependency resolution, it has also
introduced new challenges related to version management and dependency reliability.
Recognizing some limitations in the URL­based approach, the Deno team introduced
JSR (JavaScript Registry) in 2025, a modern package registry designed to support both
Deno and other JavaScript runtimes while maintaining improved security and standards
compliance (Dahl et al., 2025). JSR represents an evolution in Deno's approach to
package management, attempting to balance the flexibility of URL imports with the
convenience of centralized package management.
The release of Deno 2 in 2024 marked a considerable milestone in the runtime's
evolution, with enhanced compatibility with the Node.js ecosystem (Dahl et al., 2024).
This improved compatibility addresses one of the primary barriers to Deno adoption:
the inability to leverage existing NPM packages. Deno 2 includes NPM compatibility
features that allow developers to use many existing Node.js packages while
maintaining Deno's security model and modern features.
The formation of the Deno Company in 2021 provided commercial backing for the
runtime's development and signaled a commitment to long­term sustainability (Dahl &
Belder, 2021). This commercial foundation has enabled more aggressive growth and
marketing efforts, though it has also raised questions about the runtime's governance
and future direction (Anderson, 2021).
While Deno's security­first design addresses many of Node.js's vulnerabilities, recent
academic research has pointed out new security challenges specific to Deno's
architecture and ecosystem. A comprehensive security study revealed various attack
vectors and vulnerabilities in Deno's permission system and ecosystem, suggesting that
the runtime faces its own unique security considerations (Alhamdan & Staicu, 2025).
These findings highlight that while Deno's approach improves security, it does not
eliminate all security concerns and requires ongoing vigilance.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

15

Despite its technical merits, Deno has faced adoption challenges that have limited its
impact in production environments. Some developers have expressed disillusionment
with Deno's ecosystem maturity, compatibility limitations, and the practical difficulties
of migrating from established Node.js workflows (Bjarnason, 2024). The runtime's
departure from established patterns in the JavaScript ecosystem has created a learning
curve that some developers find challenging to justify, given the benefits.
The comparison between Node.js and Deno often reveals trade­offs between
innovation and compatibility, with developers weighing Deno's modern features and
improved security against Node.js's mature ecosystem and proven reliability in
production environments (Chazoule, 2023). These considerations can be important for
businesses evaluating whether to adopt Deno for new projects or consider staying in
the current Node.js ecosystem.
2.4

Bun Runtime

Bun emerged in 2021 as the newest entrant in the JavaScript runtime landscape,
distinguishing itself through an aggressive focus on performance optimization and
developer experience. Announced with its 1.0 release in August 2023, Bun positioned
itself not as a complete reimagining of JavaScript runtime design like Deno, but rather
as a faster, more integrated alternative that maintains compatibility with the existing
Node.js ecosystem (Sumner et al., 2023). This compatibility­first approach addresses
one of the primary barriers that alternative runtimes face: developers’ and
organizations’ reluctance to abandon the vast NPM ecosystem and established Node.js
workflows.
The technical architecture of Bun represents a substantial departure from both Node.js
and Deno in its choice of JavaScript engine. While Node.js and Deno both utilize
Google's V8 engine, Bun is built upon JavaScriptCore, the JavaScript engine originally
developed by Apple for the Safari browser (Sumner et al., 2023). This architectural
deviation provides Bun with distinct performance characteristics and optimization
opportunities compared to V8­based runtimes.
Bun is written in Zig, a low­level systems programming language that emphasizes
performance and manual memory management while maintaining memory safety. The
combination of JavaScriptCore and Zig creates a runtime stack optimized for minimal
overhead and maximum execution speed.
Bun includes a built­in package manager, a native bundler for production deployments,
a test runner with Jest­compatible APIs, and a transpiler that handles TypeScript, JSX,

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

16

and modern JavaScript syntax without additional configuration (Sumner et al., 2023).
This level of integration reduces the need for some external dependencies and
configuration files, streamlining the development workflow.
Ahmod’s (2023) comparative analysis demonstrated that Bun consistently
outperformed Node.js across multiple metrics, including startup time, memory usage,
execution speed, and HTTP request handling capacity. The benchmarks showed that
Bun could achieve startup times approximately three times faster than Node.js. These
performance gains stem from multiple factors, including the JavaScriptCore engine's
characteristics, optimized native implementations of common operations, and
architectural decisions that minimize overhead.
The runtime also includes native implementations of common functionalities that
typically require external packages in Node.js. For example, Bun provides built­in
support for reading environment variables from .env files, native SQLite database
access, and optimized implementations of frequently used Node.js modules (Partovi,
2025).
Bun's compatibility strategy represents a pragmatic approach to the challenge of
ecosystem adoption. Rather than requiring developers to rewrite code or abandon
familiar patterns, Bun aims to serve as a drop­in replacement for Node.js (Sumner et
al., 2023). The runtime implements Node.js APIs and supports the package.json format,
NPM packages, and common Node.js conventions. By version 1.2, released in January
2025, Bun had achieved ninety­nine percent compatibility with Node.js built­in
modules, meaning that the vast majority of existing Node.js applications can run on
Bun with minimal or no modifications (Partovi, 2025). This profound compatibility
reduces the risk and effort required from developers to experiment with Bun.
The adoption patterns revealed in the State of JavaScript 2024 survey show that Bun
has achieved notable early traction, with 16% of respondents reporting regular use
despite being the newest of the three runtimes examined in this study (Greif & Burel,
2024). This adoption rate suggests that Bun's performance benefits and compatibility
approach resonate with a segment of the developer community.
However, Bun's relative newness also means it has less production history than
Node.js's 15 years of testing. While the runtime has proven its performance in
benchmarks and smaller applications, questions remain about its behavior in large­
scale, complex production environments over an extended period of time. The
ecosystem of Bun­specific packages and tools is still developing, and edge cases in
Node.js compatibility continue to be discovered and addressed with each release
(Partovi, 2025).

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

17

Bun represents an important evolution in JavaScript runtime design, demonstrating
that large performance improvements are possible while maintaining compatibility
with existing ecosystems. As Bun continues to mature and its ecosystem develops, it
may prove to be a viable option for performance­critical applications.
2.5

Current Landscape and Developer Adoption

Node.js maintains a market­leading position relative to its competitors. However, the
2024 State of JavaScript survey also revealed that developers are seeking
improvements in several areas, including better organization and maintenance,
improved dependency management, higher performance, stronger type­safety, and
more advanced build tools. These findings suggest the potential for a shift in market
dynamics and may indicate an opening for emerging competitors (Greif & Burel, 2024).
Deno has better built­in security practices compared to Node.js and its NPM
ecosystem, which has become more notorious for its supply chain attacks over time,
making headline news in many blogs and forums. (Lakshmanan, 2024)
Despite Deno boasting better security by default, it does not mean that Deno is
immune to such attacks. It may have a smaller attack surface, but it does not mean that
more sophisticated attacks would not work (Alhamdan & Staicu, 2025).
Ultimately, the choice among these runtimes appears to depend on priorities: Bun
could be recommended for projects where speed is paramount, Node.js for its large
community and extensive support, and Deno for those seeking a balance in between,
with modern features and improved runtime security by default.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

18

3 Comparison of Runtime Features
Having established the historical context and evolution of JavaScript runtimes in the
previous chapter, it becomes necessary to examine the specific technical features that
differentiate Node.js, Deno, and Bun from one another. This chapter provides a
comparison of the core features that developers encounter in their day­to­day work
with these runtimes.
3.1

Module Systems and Dependency Management

One of the many ways these three runtimes differ lies in how they handle modules and
manage dependencies. Node.js originally used the CommonJS module system, which
uses the ‘require’ function to load modules synchronously. As Ryan Dahl (2018)
explained in his reflection on Node.js design decisions, this choice made sense at the
time but created long­term complications as JavaScript evolved. Node.js has since
added support for ECMAScript modules through the import and export syntax, but this
dual system has created complexity for developers who must navigate between two
different module formats within the same ecosystem.
The package management in Node.js centers around NPM and the package.json file,
which creates a centralized registry for discovering and installing packages. While this
system has been incredibly successful in building one of the largest package
ecosystems, it has introduced some security concerns. The Rspack NPM packages
compromise in December 2024 demonstrated how malicious actors can inject crypto
mining malware into popular packages, affecting thousands of developers who trusted
the NPM ecosystem (Lakshmanan, 2024). This incident highlighted the vulnerabilities
inherent in a centralized package registry where package maintainers have meaningful
power over the security of downstream applications.
Deno took a different approach to module management by embracing web standards
from the beginning. Instead of relying on a centralized package registry, Deno allows
developers to import modules directly from URLs, treating modules as web resources
(Dahl et al., 2020). This design decision aligns with how browsers handle JavaScript
modules and eliminates the need for a package.json file or a node_modules directory.
The runtime caches downloaded modules locally, but the source of truth remains in
the URL itself.
However, Deno's package ecosystem has faced criticism from developers accustomed
to the Node.js ecosystem. Bjarnason (2024) expressed frustration, noting that requiring

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

19

more than just Deno’s standard library or tooling is difficult, and that the lack of a
centralized discovery mechanism makes it harder to find quality packages. Recognizing
these concerns, the Deno team introduced import maps as a way to create aliases for
URLs, and more importantly, they launched JSR (JavaScript Registry) in 2025 as a
modern alternative to NPM (Dahl et al., 2025). JSR is designed specifically for
TypeScript and ECMAScript modules, providing package discovery while maintaining
Deno's security­first philosophy. The registry generates documentation automatically
from TypeScript types and enforces package quality standards that NPM does not
require (Dahl et al., 2025).
Bun represents another approach to dependency management by prioritizing
compatibility with the existing Node.js ecosystem while improving performance. Bun
uses a package.json file just like Node.js, but it implements its own package manager
that is notably faster than NPM, yarn, or PNPM. According to the Bun 1.0
announcement, the Bun package manager can install dependencies up to twenty times
faster than NPM in certain scenarios (Sumner et al., 2023).
3.2

Built­in Tooling and Standard Library

The scope and quality of built­in tooling represent another differentiator between
these runtimes. Node.js follows a philosophy where the core runtime provides basic
functionality, and developers rely on third­party packages for most tools. This means
that a typical Node.js project requires installing separate packages for tasks like testing,
code formatting, bundling, and transpiling TypeScript. While this approach seems
flexible, developers still have to research, select, and configure multiple tools, each
with its own documentation, update cycle, and potential security vulnerabilities.
Deno challenged this approach by including many common development tools directly
in the runtime. From versions 1.x, Deno shipped with a built­in test runner, code
formatter, compiler, and linter. These tools follow consistent command patterns and
work together seamlessly. For example, running ‘deno fmt’ formats code according to
opinionated standards without requiring any configuration files, while ‘deno test’
discovers and executes tests without needing additional test frameworks like Jest (Dahl
et al., 2020; Dahl & Iwańczuk, 2020). This integrated approach can reduce the number
of dependencies a project needs and simplify the development workflow.
The Deno standard library also deserves attention as it provides well­tested, audited
modules for common tasks like file system operations, HTTP servers, and data
manipulation. Unlike Node.js, where developers often reach for third­party packages
for these tasks, Deno provides its standard library modules that are maintained by the

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

20

core team and follow semantic versioning (Dahl et al., 2024). This reduces the need for
external dependencies and provides more stability.
Bun implements many Node.js APIs natively and performantly, while adding new APIs
for common needs. This includes native support for environment variable files, built­in
HTTP server capabilities, and native implementations of packages like node:sqlite
(Partovi, 2025). By version 1.2, Bun reached 99% compatibility with Node.js APIs while
offering better performance.
Table 1 summarizes the key build­in tooling and features available in each runtime.
3.3

TypeScript Support

To get full TypeScript support for all TypeScript­related features, Node.js requires
developers to set up a third­party TypeScript package and create a tsconfig.json
configuration file (Node.js, 2025).
Deno was designed with TypeScript in mind, executing TypeScript files directly without
configuration by including a TypeScript compiler internally (Dahl et al., 2020).
Developers simply write TypeScript and run it with Deno. The runtime uses TypeScript
for its own standard library, providing type definitions and IDE support.
Bun also provides first­class TypeScript support with direct file execution. The runtime
uses a transpiler rather than a full type checker, stripping type annotations and
transforming syntax very quickly without validating type correctness (Sumner et al.,
2023).
Node.js uses type stripping similar to Bun, removing type annotations without
performing type validation, prioritizing execution speed over type safety. In contrast,
Deno maintains the option for full type checking when needed. (Dahl & Jiang, 2025).
To wrap up the last sections, Table 1 shows how each runtime compares to the other
and what features they provide.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

21

Table 1. Overview of runtime features.

Feature

Node.js

Deno

Bun

Test Runner

External

Built­in

Built­in

Code
Formatter

External

Built­in

Built­in

Linter

External

Built­in

External

TypeScript
Support

Partial

Built­in

Built­in

Bundler

External

Built­in

Built­in

3.4

Compatability and Migration View

As Node.js is the most adopted and widely supported runtime with the largest
ecosystem, both Deno and Bun have invested substantially in Node.js compatibility to
lower adoption barriers.
Deno originally positioned itself as a clean break from Node.js, requiring developers to
rewrite code for URL imports and Deno's APIs. This created friction as developers were
reluctant to abandon existing codebases and the NPM ecosystem. The introduction of
NPM specifiers allowed importing NPM packages directly using syntax like ‘import
express from "npm:express"’, making much of the NPM ecosystem accessible (Dahl et
al., 2024).
Despite improvements, some developers remain skeptical. Bjarnason (2024) argued
that Deno's initial rejection of the Node.js ecosystem and subsequent backtracking
undermined its original vision, creating a runtime that neither fully embraces Node.js
compatibility nor cleanly breaks from it. This highlights the challenge of balancing
innovation with practical adoption concerns.
Bun took the opposite approach by making Node.js compatibility a core priority from
the start, aiming to be a drop­in replacement implementing the same APIs and
supporting the same package ecosystem without code changes (Sumner et al., 2023).
This lowers adoption risk as developers can experiment on existing projects without
committing to full rewrites.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

22

The compatibility story also extends to web standards. Both Deno and Bun implement
many Web APIs like fetch, WebSocket, and ReadableStream that are familiar to
frontend developers and standardized across browsers (Dahl et al., 2020; Sumner et al.,
2023). This alignment makes it easier to write code that works across many
environments, from backend services to edge functions to browser applications.
Migrating large Node.js applications to Deno may require more planning and
refactoring. In contrast, trying Bun on existing Node.js projects can be as simple as
replacing the ‘node’ command with ‘bun’ in development scripts. Performance
improvements may justify this switch even without code changes (Ahmod, 2023;
Sumner et al., 2023).
For new projects, compatibility considerations shift from migration to ecosystem
benefits. Developers starting fresh with Deno can fully embrace its URL­based imports
and modern architecture or use NPM packages through compatibility features. Bun
developers get automatic access to the entire NPM ecosystem while benefiting from
improved performance and integrated tooling. Node.js remains the standard,
established choice with comprehensive documentation and community support (Tal,
2023). The compatibility landscape continues to evolve as all three runtimes actively
develop new features and improve interoperability.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

23

4 Performance Comparison and Analysis
While the previous chapter examined the feature sets and architectural differences
between Node.js, Deno, and Bun, this chapter focuses on performance from locally run
benchmarks and compares it with existing research to provide a basis for comparing
these runtimes.
The performance differences between each runtime should always be taken with a
slight scepticism. Performance benchmarks don’t necessarily give the full picture of
what the runtime is like, how it will perform over a longer period of time with real
applications, and other potential considerations. (Ratanaworabhan et al., 2010)
4.1

Benchmarking Approach and Test Environment

The benchmark tests were run on a MacBook Air M2 with 16GB of system memory,
with no other applications running in the background, running tests that were meant
to compare performance from the Node.js ecosystem and what kind of performance
could be expected.
Each test was manually run 10 times, taking the best result for each runtime to avoid
potential hiccups and bias. The following benchmark code and other material can be
reviewed and viewed in GitHub. (Laakso, 2025)
This benchmarking was not meant to be scientific nor perfect, but rather a window to
compare results found in other research papers and articles, to get a general
understanding of where each runtime lands in terms of performance.
As stated at the beginning of this chapter, these performance metrics should not be
treated as an absolute source of truth, since there can be many variables that come
into play with performance benchmarking. A good example of this can be observed in
Figure 2 and Figure 3, which showcases a performance impact Deno suffers from
having to convert Node.js code for compatibility, resulting in some performance
overhead.
4.2

Benchmarks

This section showcases performance benchmarks that were conducted for Node.js,
Deno, and Bun. The tests cover simple HTTP request handling, file system operations,
JSON processing, and CPU computation.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

24

Table 2 shows a simple HTTP server implementation in Node.js that was used for this
request­per­second benchmark.
Table 2. Simple HTTP server code that was used for Figure 2 benchmark.

1 import { createServer } from "node:http";
2
3 const server = createServer((req, res) => {
4
res.writeHead(200, { "Content-Type": "application/json" });
5
res.end(JSON.stringify({ message: "Hello World", timestamp:
6 Date.now() }));
7 });
8
9 server.listen(3000, () => console.log("Server running on port
10 3000"));

Figure 2 shows how well each runtime handles a continuous stream of HTTP Requests,
utilizing the autocannon NPM package with 10 clients over 10 seconds, and then
counting the average HTTP requests handled per second.

Figure 2. How well each runtime performed in a constant stream of HTTP requests.

In this instance, Bun seems to handle the largest number of requests, reaching as high
as 100 000 requests. Node.js is not far behind, with roughly 70 000 requests. Deno is
performing the worst in this case, with only 61 446 requests. This is most likely caused

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

25

by Deno having to convert Node.js­specific behaviour to something that the Deno
runtime is compatible with, which ends up costing performance.
In Figure 3, we have the same test run with the exception of Deno serving an HTTP
server with Deno­specific code shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Deno specific code that was used to host a basic HTTP server.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Deno.serve({ port: 3000 }, () => {
return new Response(
JSON.stringify({ message: "Hello World", timestamp: Date.now()
}),
{
headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" },
},
);
});

We can observe improved performance for Deno, now performing on par with Node.js.

Figure 3. Showing Deno’s improved performance when running Deno­specific code.

This is a good example of the matter that benchmarks are not everything, and results
can vary depending on the implementation alone. With this in mind, it could be
considered that with native implementations, Deno should at the very least perform at
the same level as Node.js in many scenarios. Similarities can also be attributed to the

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

26

fact that both runtimes use the V8 engine, which could indicate a performance
limitation with said engine.

File I/O Performance
In this section, we test the read and write performance of each runtime. Reading and
writing 1000 files, each with 1 kilobyte of data.

Figure 4. Runtime read and write performance.

From these benchmarks, we can observe that Bun once again comes first, fully
completing the task in approximately 38 milliseconds. Followed up by Node.js in
roughly 56 milliseconds, and lastly Deno, being the slowest at around 72 milliseconds.

JSON Stringify and Parse Performance
In this section, we will see how performantly each runtime handles JSON, handling
userdata objects over multiple iterations.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

27

Figure 5. Displaying JSON Stringify and Parse performance between each runtime.

Once again, Bun comes out as the fastest in JSON operations, completing the task in
5,6 seconds. Deno this time clearly performing better than Node.js, fully completing
the operation in 7,53 seconds. In this scenario, both Deno and Bun can be observed to
be superior for JSON operations over Node.js.

CPU­bound Operations Performance
In this section, we will compare runtime performance in milliseconds, how quickly each
runtime runs through a set of Fibonacci calculations and array sorting.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

28

Figure 6. CPU­bound operations, performance displayed in milliseconds.

In this test, Bun outperforms both Node.js and Deno by a noteworthy margin, and once
again, both Node.js and Deno perform mostly similarly, within a margin of error. Deno
being ever so slightly slower.
4.3

Performance Analysis and Interpretation

These benchmark results showcase consistent patterns across different tests. Bun
performing the best across all tested scenarios, likely due to the use of the
JavaScriptCore engine. Deno's performance falls somewhere between Node.js and Bun
in most benchmarks. Since Deno also uses the V8 engine like Node.js, its raw JavaScript
execution speed is comparable to Node.js in many scenarios. Tal (2023) noted that
Deno's additional security checks and permission system can introduce some
overhead, particularly during file system operations and network requests where
permission validation must occur. This security overhead is generally minimal for CPU­
bound tasks but becomes more noticeable in I/O­heavy applications where the runtime
must repeatedly verify permissions for external resource access.
For web applications and API services, HTTP server performance can be important. Tal
(2023) also conducted HTTP server benchmarks, measuring requests per second and
response latency. The results demonstrated that Bun outperformed both Node.js and
Deno, which is in line with these benchmark results. When Ahmod (2023) tested HTTP

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

29

server performance, the findings aligned with Tal's results, showing Bun maintaining
higher throughput even as the concurrent connection count increased.
That being said, Node.js HTTP performance is not to be considered bad; if anything, it’s
still quite adequate, and the runtime remains highly capable of serving high levels of
web traffic. Many of the world's largest web applications run on Node.js, which
demonstrates that raw benchmark numbers do not tell the complete story of
production readiness. While Bun's built­in server may achieve higher benchmark
scores, Node.js servers benefit from extensive battle­testing and tooling built around
them.
Deno's HTTP server performance has evolved over the course of its development. The
native HTTP server implementation in Deno improved performance to be on par with
Node.js. While Deno may not match Bun's benchmark numbers, its HTTP performance
is respectable and adequate for most web applications. The runtime's focus on web
standards means that developers can use the same fetch API and web server patterns
across different environments, which offers architectural benefits even if not pure
performance advantages.
4.4

Security and Performance Implications

Node.js operates with an implicit trust model where any executed code has full access
to system resources by default. This approach minimizes security­related performance
overhead since the runtime does not need to verify permissions for operations.
However, this also means that malicious or compromised code can freely access the file
system, network, and environment variables without any restriction.
Each time a Deno script attempts to access any system resource, the runtime must
verify that the appropriate permission has been granted. Alhamdan and Staicu (2025)
conducted an analysis of Deno's security implementation and found that while the
permission checks introduce some overhead, the impact on overall application
performance is typically minimal for most workloads, which could be observed in
earlier benchmark results where Deno mostly matched the performance of Node.js.
Bun, on the other hand, follows Node.js's trust model while focusing on performance
optimization. The runtime does not implement a permission system like Deno's, leaving
the responsibility to developers. This fact allows Bun to avoid the performance
overhead of permission checks, but it also means that Bun applications face similar
security considerations as Node.js applications.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

30

The practical meaning of these different security approaches extends beyond raw
performance metrics. Organizations evaluating runtimes could consider whether the
additional security provided by Deno's permission system justifies any performance
overhead and whether it aligns with their security requirements. For educational
environments, Deno's security model could be considered a valuable teaching
opportunity about least privilege and resource access control. For high­performance
scenarios where every millisecond matters, Bun's approach of minimizing overhead
might be preferable, with security implementations and considerations left over to the
developer.
4.5

Developer Experience Considerations

All runtimes have their own positives and negatives. Node.js, being the oldest and most
supported runtime, has many guides and research already built around it, whereas
both Deno and Bun are still fairly new and have room to grow. Despite that, both Deno
and Bun offer some neat functionality out of the box that can make the developer
experience more enjoyable, and potentially save time by not needing to do separate
configuration for modern development tooling like code linting and formatting.
Deno, for example, does not need a separate formatter, linter, or TypeScript
configuration. These functionalities already exist within the runtime, so there is no
need to necessarily configure anything when starting a new project.
Bun also comes with direct TypeScript support out of the box, but Bun doesn’t have the
same kind of standard library or tooling as Deno does. Bun more or less relies on what
already exists within the Node.js ecosystem.
Currently, both Deno and Bun support existing Node.js code; specifically, support for
modules and packages has gotten relatively good over the past year.
On release, Deno did not have backwards compatibility, but since 2023, they have
gradually started to add more support. Bun has always from wanted to support
Node.js’s existing ecosystem. On release, there was Node.js support, which worked
most of the time, but still some issues persisted. Bun has, over the years, polished their
Node.js support to the point where Bun can most likely run most existing JavaScript
projects out there without any need for big modifications.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

31

5 Education and Business Considerations
Having examined the technical features, performance characteristics, and compatibility
considerations of Node.js, Deno, and Bun, it becomes necessary to address the
practical factors for educators and businesses. This chapter concludes the research to
guide runtime adoption decisions in academic and commercial contexts.
5.1

Runtime Adoption for Education

The decision of which JavaScript runtime to teach carries some consideration for
student learning and career preparedness. Current usage statistics demonstrate that
Node.js remains the predominant runtime and is considered the current standard.
Node.js should remain the standard for education, as it continues to be widely used
globally, and the skills acquired are transferable to other runtimes.
Deno's security model provides valuable lessons about the principle of least privilege
and secure­by­default design. As Dahl et al. (2020) emphasized, Deno was designed to
address issues with Node.js that cannot be fixed without any negative implications.
Exposing students to these improved designs may help them understand that current
standards are not necessarily optimal as technology and development keep moving
forward.
From a more practical standpoint, educators need not choose exclusively between
runtimes. Teaching core JavaScript and Web Development concepts using Node.js still
gives knowledge towards these alternative runtimes. Demonstrating runtime security
with simple permission examples of Node.js compared to Deno could be a fun learning
experience for students, seeing firsthand that Node.js will not prevent a malicious use
case.
5.2

Business Adoption and Migration

The performance improvements demonstrated in Chapter 4 represent genuine value
for businesses where performance directly impacts costs or user experience.
Organizations running serverless functions that execute millions of times daily could
realize cost savings from Bun's faster execution and lower memory usage. However,
performance alone rarely justifies the migration of existing applications.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

32

The compatibility analysis in Chapter 3 revealed that while Bun aims for drop­in
Node.js compatibility and achieves high compatibility rates, subtle differences may still
exist that require testing and potential code changes. Migrating a large Node.js
application to Bun requires thorough testing to ensure that all dependencies work
correctly and that no edge cases cause failures in production. The risk of introducing
bugs or unexpected behavior during migration must be weighed against the
performance benefits.
Deno presents a more complex migration story due to its different approach to
modules and security. Organizations considering Deno for existing applications face
more extensive refactoring work compared to trying Bun. However, Deno's improved
Node.js compatibility in version 2.0 has reduced this barrier to entry (Dahl et al., 2024).
The NPM specifier support means that organizations can gradually migrate applications
while still using NPM packages, though this hybrid approach may not fully leverage
Deno's architectural improvements.
Starting a new project with Bun or Deno involves less risk than migrating existing code
because there is no legacy codebase to maintain compatibility with. Organizations can
evaluate whether the performance benefits, integrated tooling, or security model align
with project requirements. A new API service with high performance requirements
might benefit substantially from Bun's speed, while a new application with more
security requirements might value Deno's permission system.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

33

6 Conclusion and Future Work
This thesis embarked on an investigation into the evolving landscape of JavaScript
runtimes, motivated by the emergence of Deno and Bun as alternatives to Node.js. The
primary objective was to conduct a comparative analysis of these three technologies to
guide developers, educators, and businesses. By examining their historical context,
technical features, and performance characteristics, this work sought to clarify the
trade­offs inherent in choosing a runtime in the modern web development ecosystem.
Through this investigation, it can be concluded that Node.js still remains the
established industry standard, its position earned through a long track record of use, a
vast and mature ecosystem, and a large global talent pool. While it may lack in raw
performance, its reliability and extensive community support make it the default
choice for a wide range of applications.
Deno started from a direct critique of Node.js’s original design, successfully delivering
on its promise of a more secure by default and modern development experience.
While its performance is generally on par with Node.js, its primary appeal lies in its
architectural coherence, standard library, web standards, and tooling, which make it an
excellent choice for new projects where a level of security and developer experience
matter.
Bun has clearly established itself as the clear leader in performance. Consistently
outperforming both Node.js and Deno across benchmarks. By prioritizing high
compatibility with the Node.js ecosystem from the beginning, Bun offers a compelling,
low­friction migration path for existing applications, with promising performance gains.
Ultimately, this thesis concludes that there is no single correct choice when it comes to
JavaScript runtimes. The choice may depend on multiple factors such as project
requirements, performance, and long­term support. Node.js has enjoyed an era of
unchallenged dominance, but we are finally starting to see competition in the server­
side JavaScript community.
On a personal level, this thesis research achieved the goals I set out to accomplish. My
primary motivation was to deepen my understanding of JavaScript runtimes beyond
surface­level knowledge driven by my own interests and to develop my academic
research skills. I also identified areas for improvement in my own work and thinking for
conveying complex information to others more simply.

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

34

6.1

Future Work

While this thesis provides a snapshot of the current JavaScript landscape at the end of
2025, the rapid pace of development in this area leaves questions open for future
investigation and research. The performance benchmarks conducted, while necessary
for comparison, represent specific workload patterns that don't reflect all scenarios.
Long­term stability and ecosystem evolution of newer runtimes remain slightly
uncertain, requiring continued observation as these platforms keep maturing.
Future research would benefit from real­world scenarios in which runtime
performance differences genuinely impact business outcomes or user experience
meaningfully, moving beyond synthetic benchmarks to production case studies. The
longevity of these platforms also warrants investigation. Which runtimes will continue
to see active development in the coming years, and what factors determine their
staying power?
Technical questions also remain open. Can runtime­level performance continue
improving, or are gains primarily limited by the underlying JavaScript engines (V8,
JavaScriptCore)? Standardized benchmarking methodologies would benefit the entire
ecosystem, enabling more reliable comparisons across runtime versions and research
studies.
Finally, ecosystem evolution presents questions about the future of JavaScript package
management. Will npm maintain its dominance, or could JSR gradually capture
significant market share?

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

35

References
Ahmod, M. F. (2023). Javascript runtime performance analysis: Node and Bun. Trepo.
https://trepo.tuni.fi/handle/10024/149672
Alhamdan, A., & Staicu, C.­A. (2025). Welcome to Jurassic Park: A comprehensive study
of security risks in Deno and its ecosystem. Network and Distributed Systems Security
Symposium, 1­17. https://doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2025.23284
Anderson, T. (2021, April). The JavaScript ecosystem is 'hopelessly fragmented'... so
here is another runtime: Deno is now a company. The Register.
https://web.archive.org/web/20240625220804/https://www.theregister.com/2021/04
/06/deno_is_now_a_company/
Bjarnason, B. (2024, January). Disillusioned with Deno.
https://www.baldurbjarnason.com/2024/disillusioned­with­deno/
Chazoule, D. (2023, December). Node or Deno, that is the question!?
https://dev.to/dmnchzl/node­or­deno­that­is­the­question­16h9
Dahl, D., & Jiang, A. (2025, March). Node just added TypeScript support. What does
that mean for Deno? https://Deno.Com/Blog/Typescript­in­Node­vs­Deno.
Dahl, R. (2018). 10 Things I regret about Node.js. JSConf EU.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3BM9TB­8yA
Dahl, R., & Belder, B. (2021, March). Announcing the Deno Company.
https://deno.com/blog/the­deno­company
Dahl, R., Belder, B., & Iwańczuk, B. (2020, May). Deno 1.0. https://deno.com/blog/v1
Dahl, R., Belder, B., Iwańczuk, B., & Jiang, A. (2024, October). Announcing Deno 2.
https://deno.com/blog/v2.0
Dahl, R., Casonato, L., & Whinnery, K. (2025, May). Introducing JSR ­ The JavaScript
Registry. https://deno.com/blog/jsr_open_beta
Dahl, R., & Iwańczuk, B. (2020). Deno in 2020. https://deno.com/blog/deno­in­2020.
Gautam, S. (2021). Deno - A new Node.js? [Bachelor's thesis, Haaga­Helia, University of
Applied Sciences]. Theseus. https://www.theseus.fi/handle/10024/497744

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

36

Greif, S., & Burel, E. (2024, December). State of Javascript: 2024.
https://2024.stateofjs.com/en­US/other­tools/#runtimes
Laakso, J. (2025, November). JavaScript Runtime Benchmarks.
https://github.com/Ducky07/js­runtime­snapshot/tree/11­2025
Lakshmanan, R. (2024, December). Rspack npm Packages Compromised with Crypto
Mining Malware. The Hacker News. https://thehackernews.com/2024/12/rspack­npm­
packages­compromised­with.html
Node.js. (2025, August). Modules: TypeScript | Node.js.
https://web.archive.org/web/20250812125702/https://nodejs.org/api/typescript.html
Partovi, A. (2025, January 22). Bun 1.2. Bun Blog. https://bun.sh/blog/bun­v1.2
Ratanaworabhan, P., Livshits, B., & Goth Zorn, B. (2010). JSMeter: Comparing the
Behavior of JavaScript Benchmarks with Real Web Applications.
https://www.usenix.org/legacy/events/webapps10/tech/full_papers/Ratanaworabhan.
pdf
Sumner, J., Partovi, A., & McDonnell, C. (2023, August 8). Bun 1.0. Bun Blog.
https://bun.sh/blog/bun­v1.0
Tal, L. (2023, September). Node.js vs. Deno vs. Bun: Performance & JavaScript runtime
comparison. Snyk Blog. https://snyk.io/blog/javascript­runtime­compare­node­deno­
bun/
Usage statistics of Node.js. (2025). W3Techs.
https://w3techs.com/technologies/details/ws­nodejs
Vepsäläinen, J., Vuorimaa, P., & Hellas, A. (2025). The potential of serverless edge­
powered islands for web development. Journal of Web Engineering, 24(1), 1­38.
https://doi.org/10.13052/jwe1540­9589.2411
Xuân, H. (2025). Things I like about Deno. https://2coffee.dev/en/articles/5­things­i­
like­about­deno

Turku University of Applied Sciences Thesis | Juuso Laakso

